---
source: https://people.csail.mit.edu/asolar/SynthesisCourse/2025/Lecture7.htm
original_file: Lecture7.htm
---

Lecture 7

# Introduction to Program Synthesis

© Armando Solar-Lezama. 2025. All rights reserved.

[Lecture 1](Lecture7.md#about) [Lecture 2](Lecture7.md#services) [Lecture 3](Lecture7.md#clients) [Lecture 4](Lecture7.md#contact)

# Lecture 7: Synthesis with constraints

The techniques described in the previous lecture used symbolic representations of the program space, but they still involved a fair amount of enumeration. We now focus on a class of techniques that are "more symbolic", and have more flexibility in capturing complex program spaces, although at the expense of a significant computational cost.

For this lecture and the next, we will be using the Sketch synthesis system as a canonical examplesketchthesis, although there are other systems such as RosetteTorlakB14, SyGuS solvers such as CVC5barbosa2022cvc5, and BrahmaJha:2010 which are based on similar principles. The similarities and differences between these different systems will be elaborated at the end of the unit.

## Constraint-based synthesis at a glance

The high-level idea in constraint-based synthesis is to represent the program space as a parametric program $P[c]$, so that different values of the parameters correspond to different programs in the space. The idea is to translate requirements on the behavior of the program $P[c]$ into constraints on the parameters $c$, so that any value of $c$ that satisfies the constraints $\varphi(c)$ is guaranteed to lead to a program $P[c]$ satisfying all the requirements.

In order for this approach to work, we need three ingredients. First, we need a mechanism for creating parametric programs from a high-level definition of the program space. Second, we need a mechanism for constructing constraint systems from these parametric programs and their requirements, and finally, we need efficient mechanisms for solving the resulting constraint systems. We start by addressing the first point.

## From program spaces to parametric programs.

There are two major approaches for defining the parametric programs that are the starting point of constraint-based synthesis. The first approach is to provide the user with a high-level notation for describing a program space, and then have a compiler that converts this definition into a parametric program. This is the approach taken by Brahma or by the SyGuS solvers. In the case of Brahma, the user simply provides a bag of components, and the system automatically produces a parametric program where different choices of parameters correspond to different ways of connecting the components together. In the case of the SyGuS solvers, the user provides a context-free grammar for a space of expressions, and the solver generates a parametric program from this grammar.

The alternative approach, implemented in Sketch, is to provide the user with a rich and expressive language for directly writing parametric programs. This expressiveness provides the programmer with significant control over the program space and its encoding as a parametric program. That control allows an expert user to carefully engineer a program space to maximize the efficiency of the synthesis process, but it also introduces an extra level of complexity for less sophisticated users who must deal with the added complexity of defining their program space as a parametric program. Sketch tries to alleviate this burden by providing powerful abstraction facilities that allow potentially complex definitions of program spaces to be encapsulated and reused across many different programs.

## Sketch: a language for parametric programs.

The most authoritative source for the sketch language is the [sketch manual](http://people.csail.mit.edu/asolar/manual.pdf). In this section, we provide a brief overview of the key principles behind the language. At a high-level, sketch is a simple imperative language with support for many of the features we have come to expect from modern languages including heap allocated structures, high-order functions and polymorphism (known as generics in Java). There are three features, however, that distinguish Sketch from other languages: Unknown constants, harnesses and generator functions.

Unknown constants. An unknown constant in Sketch is expressed as $??$. The type of this constant is inferred from context; it can be an integer, a boolean, a character or a fixed size array of either. At synthesis time, sketch replaces each unknown constant with a fixed constant so that all the requirements are satisfied. For example, the simplest sketch program that illustrates the main ideas in the language is shown below.  int doublevalue(int in){ int t = in * ??; assert t == in + in; return t; }  In the program, the unknown constant must be replaced with an integer constant. The assertion imposes the requirement that `t==in+in`, which clearly forces the unknown constant to resolve to the number 2. The assertion, however, is only valid in the context of a test harness.

Test harnesses. A test harness is simply a function that when invoked must not trigger any assertion violations. For example, in order to force the `doublevalue` function above to synthesize to the correct function, we can use the following test harness.  harness void test1(){ doublevalue(5); doublevalue(7); doublevalue(3); }  We could have also excluded the `assert` inside the `doublevalue` function itself and instead placed the assertion in the test harness.  harness void test1(){ assert doublevalue(5) == 10; assert doublevalue(7) == 14; assert doublevalue(3) == 6; }  Since we are focusing on the inductive synthesis case, we will focus on the case where the test harness does not take any inputs, and instead just invokes the desired functions using fixed values. Later in the course we will explore more general test harnesses that can impose constraints that must hold for all inputs.

Lecture7:Slide5; Lecture7:Slide6  Generator function. At this point, we already have a language expressive enough to discover some interesting aspects of a program. For example, if a program involves an affine expression, say over a variable `x`, but we do not want to have to think about the constants involved, we can just express it as `x*??+??`. Or, for example, if at some point we are not sure whether we should use variable `x` or variable `y`, we can use `?? ? x : y`, using the `?:` ternary operator like the one available in C. In order to support the description of more general program spaces, we need some additional machinery, which we borrow from the generative programming literature. In particular, Sketch uses the notion of a generator, which looks like a function, but with the property that it will get fully inlined and partially evaluated into its calling context. As a simple example directly from the Sketch manual, consider the problem of specifying the set of linear functions of two parameters `x` and `y`. That space of functions can be described with the following simple generator function:  generator int legen(int i, int j){ return ??*i + ??*j + ??; }  The generator function can be used anywhere in the code in the same way a function would, but the semantics of generators are different from functions. In particular, every call to the generator will be replaced by a concrete piece of code in the space of code fragments defined by the generator. Different calls to the generator function can produce different code fragments. For example, consider the following use of the generator.  harness void main(int x, int y){ assert legen(x, y) == 2*x + 3; assert legen(x,y) == 3*x + 2*y; }  Calling the solver on the above code produces the following output  void _main (int x, int y){ assert ((((2 * x) + (0 * y)) + 3) == ((2 * x) + 3)); assert (((3 * x) + (2 * y)) == ((3 * x) + (2 * y))); }  Note that each invocation of the generator function was replaced by a concrete code fragment in the space of code fragments defined by the generator.

Lecture7:Slide9; Lecture7:Slide11  Up to this point, though, the generator may seem like a typesafe macro, little more than syntactic sugar. What gives generators their real power is the ability to be recursive. For example, the generator in the figure, describes a grammar of expressions, which can either be a variable `x`, an unknown bit-vector constant, or the bitwise combination or bitwise negation of recursively generated expressions. Each recursive invocation of the generator can have its own distinct values for the unknown constants. This idiom of using generators to define a space of programs as a context free grammar is quite common across many different applications of Sketch.

In addition to being recursive, generators can also be high-order, meaning that they can take other functions or even other generators as parameters. An example of this is the `rep` generator also shown in the figure. This generator takes as a parameter a function or a generator `f`, and applies it $n$ times.  generator void rep(int n, fun f){ if(n>0){ f(); rep(n-1, f); } }  This very simple generator actually implements a very important computational pattern, one where a particular kind of operation needs to be performed multiple times, but each time may actually correspond to a distinct operation. For example, consider the code below:  bit[32] reverseSketch(bit[32] in) { bit[32] t = in; int s = 1; generator void tmp(){ bit[32] m = ??; t = ((t << s) & m )| ((t >> s) & (~m)); s = s*??; } rep(??, tmp); return t; }  The goal of the sketch above is to reverse the bits in a 32-bit word through a combination of shifts and masks. The generator `tmp` reflects the basic computational pattern for each step, where the word is shifted left and right by some amount, and a mask determines which bits to keep from the left shift and which from the right shift. After that, the shift amount is multiplied by a constant. We know the computation involves some number of such operations, but not how many. The generator `rep` is ideally suited for that purpose. Note that the first parameter `n`, which defines the depth of the recursion, does not have to be a constant; the number of iterations is part of what the synthesizer needs to discover. The result of solving this sketch against a suitable harness would look something like this:  void reverseSketch (bit[32] in, ref bit[32] _out) implements reverse/*reverse.sk:7*/ { bit[32] __sa0 = {0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1}; _out = ((in << 1) & __sa0) | ((in >> 1) & (~(__sa0))); bit[32] __sa0_0 = {0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,1}; _out = ((_out << 2) & __sa0_0) | ((_out >> 2) & (~(__sa0_0))); bit[32] __sa0_1 = {0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1}; _out = ((_out << 4) & __sa0_1) | ((_out >> 4) & (~(__sa0_1))); bit[32] __sa0_2 = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1}; _out = ((_out << 8) & __sa0_2) | ((_out >> 8) & (~(__sa0_2))); bit[32] __sa0_3 = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1}; _out = ((_out << 16) & __sa0_3) | ((_out >> 16) & (~(__sa0_3))); return; }  An important thing to note in the generated code is that much of the control structure in the generator has completely disappeared. All the branches and all the recursive calls have been partially evaluated away, so what is left is just the code the user actually wants, albeit with somewhat ugly variable names.

## Formalizing generator functions.

Lecture7:Slide16; Lecture7:Slide17; Lecture7:Slide20; Lecture7:Slide21  The first step in understanding how constraints are produced from a program written in Sketch is to state more precisely the semantics of generators. This will be done following the formalization in a 2013 journal paper on SketchSolar-Lezama13. As mentioned before, Sketch is really just a notation for writing parametric programs. A program in Sketch can be thought of as a parametric function, parameterized by a function $\phi$. This function $\phi$ is really just a table that tells us the value of each of the different constants inside a Sketch.

If it were not for recursive generators, it would be straightforward to simply assign a unique name to each distinct unknown constant in the sketch, and then make $\phi$ just a mapping from that name to a corresponding value as illustrated in the figure. However, recursive generators introduce a wrinkle into this story because the same syntactic instance of a hole is supposed to have different values for different instances of the generator. We formalize this by making $\phi$ a function of a context in addition to a hole.

The idea is that when you write a sketch with generators, the compiler internally assigns each callsite for a generator a unique code. When a generator is called, it is assigned a calling context which summarizes where the generator was called. This context is then passed to $\phi$ as illustrated in the figure. Note that when a generator is called from another generator, the new callsite name is appended to the existing context, but when it is called from a function, there is no prior context to consider, and only the callsite name is used. Also, if a hole is used outside of a generator, just within a normal function, then it will just have the empty context.

The result, as illustrated in the last frame in the figure, is that a sketch with recursive generators can have a potentially unbounded set of values. In practice, Sketch avoids this by bounding the depth of recursion for generators, a bound that is defined by a command-line flag "`--bnd-inline-amnt`". With a bound on the depth of recursion $\phi$ becomes once again just a table, mapping a finite set of hole names and a calling contexts to values. Over the next lecture, then, we focus on the process of generating constraints on $\phi$, and solving them in order to find values that allow the sketch to satisfy all its assertions.

## From sketch to constraints

Before we jump into the details of how to generate constraints from a Sketch, we need to understand something about how to define the semantics of a simple language. There are many different formalisms for doing this, but a very popular one in the context of imperative language is to define the semantics of an expression as a function from a state to a value. Specifically, the denotational semantics for expressions is a function \[ \newcommand{\esem}{\mathcal{A}} \esem[\![ \cdot ]\!] : Expr \rightarrow \Sigma \rightarrow Val \] Where $\Sigma$ is just the set of possible states for a program. In other words, for a given expression, say $x + 5$, $\esem[\![ x+5 ]\!] $ will give us a function that given a state containing values for each variable, will give us back a value, hopefully corresponding to the value of x in the state plus five.

Similarly, the semantics of a statement (also often called command in the literature) are represented as a function that maps the state of a program to a new state. Specifically, the denotational semantics for a statement is a function \[ \newcommand{\csem}{\mathcal{C}} \csem[\![ \cdot ]\!] : cmd \rightarrow \Sigma \rightarrow \Sigma \]  Lecture8:Slide5; Lecture8:Slide6; Lecture8:Slide7  For example, the figure illustrates the semantics for a very simple imperative language. Note that the semantics are described recursively following the syntactic structure of the language. For example, the semantics of constants are just the value of the constant, and the semantics for variables are defined in terms of the state, which assigns a value to every variable. For simplicity, the language elides the distinction between booleans and integers, just using 1 as a stand-in for true.

For commands, the semantics are also defined recursively. The most interesting rule is the rule for assignment of the form `x:=expr`, which produces a new state that is just like the state before the assignment, but with $x$ now mapped to a new value corresponding to the result of evaluating $expr$ on the initial state. Sequential composition is just what one would expect, the semantics is just the result of chaining together the semantics of the two corresponding statements. The rule for `if` is interesting notationwise. To understand the notation, remember that a state is a mapping from variable names to values. So the if rule produces a new mapping that will return either the values created by the then branch, or the values created by the else branch depending on whether the condition evaluated to true or not.

Loops are interesting because they necessarily involve recursion. The recursion stops only when we reach a state where the loop condition evaluates to false.

## Symbolic execution of a sketch

Lecture8:Slide8; Lecture8:Slide9; Lecture8:Slide10 The basic idea when creating constraints from a sketch is that we want to perform symbolic execution. Unlike the standard execution which runs a program and produces states mapping variables to values, our symbolic execution will run a program and produce symbolic values and constraints.

The formalism is similar from before, but for expressions, the semantics are now a function that takes in a state mapping variable names to symbolic values and producing symbolic values, which are really just symbolic representations of a function from an assignment to holes $\phi$ to a concrete value. An important thing to note is that the denotation function is parametric on the context $\tau$, which is important in correctly generating constraints for generators.

For example, the figure shows the semantics of a few basic expressions. The most interesting is the semantics for a hole with a unique label $??_i$. Just like we saw before, given an assignment $\phi$, the value of the hole is simply whatever $\phi$ assigns to that hole under the current context.

More interesting still are the semantics of commands. Unlike before, two things happen when we evaluate a command. First, the state may change, as variables are assigned new values. But also, the set of valid assignments may be restricted, for example, by an assertion. So the semantics of a command take in a state and a representation of a set of valid assignments and produces a new state and a new set of valid assignments. For example, after an assignment statement, the set of valid assignments remains unchanged, but the state is updated with the assigned variable now mapping to a new symbolic value. When an assert is executed, on the other hand, the state remains unchanged, but the set of valid assignments is now restricted to only those assignments that cause the expression to evaluate to true under the current state.

Lecture8:Slide11; Lecture8:Slide12; Lecture8:Slide13; Lecture8:Slide14; Lecture8:Slide15; Lecture8:Slide16  The semantics of branches and loops are a little more involved. In the case of branches, each branch is evaluated on the set of values that satisfy the branch, and the results of the two branches are combined at the end as illustrated by the animation. The state is also modified by the branch in the same way as it was in the case of the simple imperative language.

Loops follow the same logic, but with the caveat that loop evaluation is recursive. This is problematic because unlike the standard execution where we could stop the recursion as soon as we got a state where the condition evaluated to true, in this case we are doing symbolic execution, so even if we wanted to we would not be able to tell when the expression evaluates to true. Note that the definition does not even guard the recursion by a conditional. In principle, we could compute the expression to the right recursively until we reach a fixpoint, that is, sooner or later, additional recursive calls to $W$ will stop contributing anything to the resulting set, and at that point we can stop recursing. In practice, Sketch simply continues this process until we reach a hard-coded limit determined by a compile-time flag "`--bnd-unroll-amnt`".

## Representing Sets and Symbolic Expressions

Lecture8:Slide17  The symbolic execution defined earlier relies on our ability to compactly represent both the symbolic values $\Psi$ and the set of viable candidates $\Phi$. For the symbolic values, the representation is simply as an AST with unknowns at the leaves. For the set $\Phi$, we represent them as predicates. The idea of representing sets as predicates is very common in many different areas of program analysis and synthesis. The idea is to represent a set $\Phi$ as a predicate $P_\Phi(\phi)$ such that $P_\Phi(\phi) \mbox{ iff } \phi\in \Phi$. Thus, for example, the predicate $true$ corresponds to the universal set, and the standard operations of Union and intersection correspond to and and or of the corresponding predicates respectively.

From the semantics, for example, we see that assert restricts the set to those $\phi$ for which the expression is true. This means that if we initially had a set represented by a predicate $P_\Phi(\phi)$, then after the assert, the set would be represented by the new predicate \[ P_\Phi(\phi) \wedge f(\phi)=1 \mbox{ where } f(\phi) = \esem[\![ e ]\!] ^\tau \sigma \phi \] Similarly, the union in the semantics of `if` would be represented as \[ P_{\Phi_1}(\phi) \vee P_{\Phi_2}(\phi) \] The figure above provides an example of the representation of the set of valid examples for a given sketch. The nodes labeled as `mux` simply select from their two inputs based on whether a condition is true or false. The `and` joins together the constraints from the two asserts, each of which involves an `or` because the asserts are guarded by `if` conditions. Another point to note is that the representation is not quite a tree, but a DAG. This is simply an optimization to exploit sharing in the underlying expression.

## Optimizing the representation

Lecture8:Slide46; Lecture8:Slide47; Lecture8:Slide48; Lecture8:Slide48; Lecture8:Slide49; Lecture8:Slide50; Lecture8:Slide51; Lecture8:Slide52; Lecture8:Slide53; Lecture8:Slide54; Lecture8:Slide55; Lecture8:Slide56; Lecture8:Slide57; Lecture8:Slide58; Lecture8:Slide59; Lecture8:Slide60; Lecture8:Slide61  There are two major optimizations that are used to reduce the size of the representation: structural hashing and algebraic simplification. Structural hashing is illustrated by the animation. The idea is simply to identify common sub-expressions and represent them with the same node. Because the representation is a DAG, it is sufficient to traverse it from the leaves down to the root node in one pass. For every node we record its type and the ID of its parents. If two nodes of the same type share the same parents, they get merged into a single node.

Structural hashing is most powerful when combined with algebraic simplification. This involves rewriting the DAG based on algebraic equalities. Each rewrite simplifies the representation, but also potentially helps uncover additional shared structure as illustrated in the figure. The current Sketch solver release has a hand-crafted simplifier, although in recent work, we have explored the automatic synthesis of the simplification layerRohit0002S16. The workhorse for solving constraints is the SAT solver, which is able to take a boolean formula expressed in Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) and either generate a satisfying assignment or prove that the constraints are unsatisfiable, i.e. that they have no solution. Over the rest of this section, we describe how the constraints from the previous lecture are translated into boolean constraints in CNF form, and how the SAT solver is able to solve them.

## From high-level constraints to CNF

Lecture9:Slide5  In the boolean satisfiability literature, a Literal is either a variable or its negation. A Clause is a disjunction (or) of literals. A formula is said to be in Conjunctive Normal Form if it consists of a conjunction (and) of clauses. The CNF representation has a number of advantages. A particularly important one is that we can turn an arbitrary boolean formula into CNF format in polynomial time. This is unlike Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) which may require exponential time to generate.

The basic approach for generating a CNF formula from an arbitrary boolean formula is illustrated by the figure. The approach is based on the observation that a formula of the form $\wedge_i l_i \Rightarrow l_j$ is trivially converted into a CNF formula. Given a boolean formula represented as a DAG, it is easy to define for each node a set of implications that relate the values of the input to the values of the output. For example, given a node of the form $t1 = h_0 \wedge h_1$, we can write out the set of implications that define the relationship between $t1$, $h_0$ and $h_1$, namely, \[ \begin{array}{ccc} h_0 \wedge h_1 \Rightarrow t_1 & \equiv & \bar{h_0} \vee \bar{h_1} \vee t_1\\ t_1 \Rightarrow h_0 & \equiv & \bar{t_1} \vee h_0\\ t_1 \Rightarrow h_1 & \equiv & \bar{t_1} \vee h_1 \end{array} \] In addition to Booleans, though, Sketch supports Integers, Floating point values, bit-vectors, arrays and recursive datatypes. Most of these types are supported through one-hot encodings.

## One-hot encoding in Sketch

Lecture9:Slide10  A One-hot encoding is essentially a unary encoding. The basic idea is to have a separate indicator variable for each possible value of a variable that indicates what the true value is. For example, the figure illustrates a one-hot encoding where two variables, each with three possible values are added together. Each value is represented as a list of value, indicator variable pairs. The result contains all possible values that can result from adding the original two numbers, and the new indicator variables are now boolean combinations of the indicator variables in the original values.

By default, every integer in sketch is represented using this one-hot encoding, and when using the "`--fe-fpencoding TO_BACKEND`" flag, even floating point values are stored using this encoding as well. By default, even arrays are represented using this encoding. Every entry in the array having one bit for every possible value for that entry. Recursive data-types are also represented using this kind of encoding; the details are beyond the scope of this lecture, but can be found on a recent paper by Inala et alInalaPQLS17.

There are a number of advantages to this encoding, particularly its simplicity and flexibility. Most importantly, the encoding can also be extremely efficient in allowing the SAT solver to propagate information about the possible values of a variable. The major downside of this encoding is that it is very space inefficient. As the number of possible values for a variable grows, so does the number of bits required to represent it. This can be particularly problematic for sketches that are heavy in arithmetic. For those sketches, sketch provides an alternative solver that does not rely on one-hot encodings, and which can be enabled with the flag "`--slv-nativeints`".

## Solving SAT problems

Lecture9:Slide12; Lecture9:Slide13; Lecture9:Slide14; Lecture9:Slide15; Lecture9:Slide16; Lecture9:Slide17; Lecture9:Slide18; Lecture9:Slide19; Lecture9:Slide20; Lecture9:Slide21; Lecture9:Slide22; Lecture9:Slide23; Lecture9:Slide24; Lecture9:Slide25; Lecture9:Slide26; Lecture9:Slide27  Modern SAT solvers are based on the DPLL algorithm named after Martin Davis, George Logemann, Donald Loveland and Hilary Putnam. The algorithm performs a backtracking search over the space of possible assignments to a boolean formula, but the key idea of the algorithm is that every time it makes a choice for the value of a variable, it propagates the logical implications of that assignment. The process is illustrated in the figure. After the variable $x_1$ is set, the clause $\bar{x_1} \vee x_7$ forces the value of $x_7$ to be true through unit propagation. As the assignment of variables and propagation of logical consequences continues, eventually one of two things happen, either the solver assignes values to all the variables and terminates, or it runs into a contradiction as illustrated in the figure where the assignment of false to $x_9$ implies that $x_4$ is both true and false according to different clauses.

Modern SAT solvers improve on this basic algorithm in three important ways. The first one, also illustrated in the figure is conflict analysis. Every time the solver arrives at a contradiction, it traces back to identify a small set of assignments that led to that contradiction. In the case of the example, we can lay the blame of the conflict on the assignment to $x_1$, $x_5$, and $\bar{x_9}$. This explanation for the conflict is summarized in a conflict clause that prevents that bad assignment from appearing again. The conflict clause is not unique; for example, $\bar{x_7} \vee \bar{x_5} \vee x_9$ would also be an acceptable conflict, because as we can see from the figure, an assignment with $x_7, x_5$ and $\bar{x_9}$ would also lead to the same contradiction we observed.

More formally, every time we observe a conflict, we can define a conflict graph where each node $N$ corresponds to a variable, and there is a directed edge $(n_1, n_2)$ connecting two nodes iff the clause that forced $n_2$ to be set to a value includes variable $n_1$. It is not hard to see that this conflict graph will be a DAG. The source nodes will be the variables that were chosen arbitrarily, and the inner nodes correspond to the assignments that were implied by those arbitrary assignments. Every time a contradiction is reached, the conflict graph can tell us what the possible conflict clauses are. Specifically, any set of nodes in the graph that separates the decision variables (the sources in the DAG) from the conflict will make a valid conflict clause. Thus, in the example, the conflict graph tells us that another valid conflict clause would be $\bar{x_6} \vee x_3 \vee x_9$. This process of learning conflict clauses is termed Conflict Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) and was first proposed by Marques Silva and Sakallah in their seminal paper on the GRASP SAT SolverSilvaS96.

The second important improvement over the basic algorithm in addition to CDCL is called two literal watching, which was first developed by Moskewicz, Madigan, Zhao, Zhang and Malik in the Chaff SAT solverMoskewiczMZZM01. The key observation behind two-literal watching is that while in principle, every time we set the value of a variable we have to visit all the clauses that include that variable, in practice, the only cases where a clause actually leads to some action is when we set the second to last literal. At that point, if all other literals have been set to false, and this second to last literal is also set to false, then the last remaining literal must be set to true for the clause to be satisfied, and we get unit propagation. So unit propagation will only happen when we set the second to last variable. So the idea is for every clause, we keep track of two literals that haven't been set. As long as there are two literals that have not been set, setting other literals in the clause will have no effect, so there is no need to do anything. Only when one of the two unwatched literals is set, then we check one of three possibilities: (a) maybe some of the other literals we were not watching was already set to true, in which case the clause is already satisfied and there is nothing else to do; (b) maybe there are other literals that have not been set, in which case we just switch the literals we currently watch so that we are again watching to unassigned literals, or (c) these two literals are the last unassigned literals and all others have been set to false, in which case we do unit propagation. By watching only two literals at a time, the solver saves an enormous amount of memory trafic by only having to visit a small fraction of the clauses every time an variable is assigned.

Finally, the third important optimization in a modern SAT solver involves being careful (but not too careful) in picking which variables to assign next. The point about not being too careful is actually important. The most popular heuristic is Variable State Independent Decaying Sum (VSIDS), which is very simple, but also very fast, so even though it is not too sophisticated, because it is very fast, it allows us to search more efficiently overall. The basic idea in VSIDS is to keep a score for every variable that is additively bumped based on how much that variable is used, for example in conflict clauses, and then it is exponentially decayed over time.

Overall, the combination of clever heuristics and careful engineering allows modern SAT solvers to solve synthesis problems with millions of variables and clauses. Later in the course we will discuss SMT solvers, which are built on top of SAT solvers and provide additional expressive power that is particularly important for dealing with verification problems.
